website/get-started/writing-graphql.md, before:

---
title: Writing GraphQL
description: How to get set up and ready
---

# Writing GraphQL

In `gql.tada`, we write our GraphQL documents using the `graphql()`
function.

> [!NOTE]
> In the following examples, we’ll import `graphql()` from `gql.tada`.
> However, if you’ve previously followed the steps on the “Installation” page
> [to initialize `gql.tada` manually](./installation#initializing-gqltada-manually),
> you’ll instead have to import your custom `graphql()` function, as
> returned by `initGraphQLTada()`.

## Queries

When passing a query to `graphql()`, it will be parsed in TypeScript’s type system
and the schema that’s set up is used to map this document over to a type.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonsQuery = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList($limit: Int = 10) {
    pokemons(limit: $limit) {
      id
      name
    }
  }
`);
```

The `PokemonsQuery` variable will have an inferred type that defines the
type of the data result of the query. When adding variables, the types of variables
are added to the inferred type as well.
The resulting type is known as a [`TypedDocumentNode`](https://github.com/dotansimha/graphql-typed-document-node)
and is supported by most GraphQL clients.

When passing a `gql.tada` query to a GraphQL client, the type
of input variables and result data are inferred automatically.
For example, with `urql` and React, this may look like the following:

```tsx twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { useQuery } from 'urql';
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

// @annotate: PokemonsQuery carries a type for data and variables:

const PokemonsQuery = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList($limit: Int = 10) {
    pokemons(limit: $limit) {
      id
      name
    }
  }
`);

const PokemonsListComponent = () => {
// @annotate: Types for data and variables are applied from PokemonsQuery:

  const [result] = useQuery({
    query: PokemonsQuery,
    variables: { limit: 5 },
  });

  return (
    <ul>
      {result.data?.pokemons?.map((pokemon) => (
        <li key={pokemon?.id}>{pokemon?.name}</li>
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
};
```

The same applies to mutation operations, subscription operations, and fragment definitions.

The `graphql()` function will parse your GraphQL definitions, take the first definition it
finds and infers its type automatically.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { graphql, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';

// @annotate: The first definition’s types are inferred:

const MarkCollectedMutation = graphql(`
  mutation MarkCollected($id: ID!) {
    markCollected(id: $id) {
      id
      name
      collected
    }
  }
`);

// @annotate: Inferring the definition’s variables…

type variables = VariablesOf<typeof MarkCollectedMutation>;

// @annotate: …and the definition’s result type.

type result = ResultOf<typeof MarkCollectedMutation>;
```

The above example uses the `ResultOf` and `VariablesOf` types for illustrative purposes.
These type utilities may be used to manually unwrap the types of a GraphQL `DocumentNode`
returned by `graphql()`.

<a href="/guides/typed-documents" class="button">
    Learn more about Typed Documents
</a>

---

## Fragments

The `graphql()` function allows for fragment composition, which means we’re able to create
a fragment and spread it into our definitions or other fragments.

Creating a fragment is the same as any other operation definition.
The type of the first definition, in this case a fragment, will be used
to infer the result type of the returned document:

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);
```

Spreading this fragment into another fragment or operation definition requires us
to pass the fragment into a tuple array on the `graphql()` function’s second argument.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

// ---cut-before---
const PokemonsList = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList {
    pokemons(limit: 10) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);
```

Here we spread our `PokemonFragment` into `PokemonsList` by passing it into
the `graphql()` function and then using its name in the GraphQL document.

### Fragment Masking

However, in `gql.tada` a pattern called **“Fragment Masking”** applies.
`PokemonsList`’s result type does not contain the `name` and `collected` field
from the spread fragment and instead contains a reference to the `PokemonFragment`.

This forces us to unwrap, or rather “unmask”, the fragment first.

```tsx twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { useQuery } from 'urql';
import { graphql, readFragment } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

const PokemonsList = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList {
    pokemons(limit: 10) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);

const PokemonsListComponent = () => {
  const [result] = useQuery({ query: PokemonsList });

// @annotate: The data here does not contain our fragment’s fields:

const { pokemons } = result.data!;

  return pokemons?.map((item) => {
// @annotate: Calling readFragment() unwraps the type of the fragment:

    const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, item);
    return pokemon?.name;
  });
};
```

When spreading a fragment into a parent definition, the parent only contains a reference to the fragment.
This means that we’re isolating fragments. Any spread fragment data cannot be accessed directly until
the fragment is unmasked.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
declare var client: import('@urql/core').Client;

// ---cut-before---
import { graphql, readFragment } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

const PokemonQuery = graphql(`
  query Pokemon($id: ID!) {
    pokemon(id: $id) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);

const result = await client.query(PokemonQuery, { id: '001' });
// @annotate: Pokemon’s data is only accessible once unmasked with readFragment()
const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, result.data?.pokemon);
```

`PokemonFragment`’s fragment mask in `PokemonQuery` is only unmasked and accessible as its plain result
type once we call `readFragment()` on the fragment mask.
In this case, we’re passing `data.pokemon`, which is an object containing the fragment
mask.

This all only happens and is enforced at a type level, meaning that we don’t incur any overhead
during runtime for masking our fragments.

### Fragment Composition

Fragment Masking is a concept that only exists to enforce proper **Fragment Composition**.

In a componentized app, fragments may be used to define the data requirements of UI components,
which means, we’ll define fragments, colocate them with our components, and compose them into
other fragments or our query.

Since all fragments are masked in our types, this colocation is enforced and we maintain our
data requirements to UI component relationship.

For example, our `PokemonFragment` may be associated with a `Pokemon` component rendering
individual items:

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [components/Pokemon.tsx]
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
// @filename: components/Pokemon.tsx
// ---cut---
import { graphql, readFragment, FragmentOf } from 'gql.tada';

export const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

interface Props {
// @annotate: The component accepts a fragment mask of PokemonFragment:

  data: FragmentOf<typeof PokemonFragment>;
}

export const PokemonComponent = ({ data }: Props) => {
// @annotate: In the component body we unwrap the fragment mask:

  const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, data);
  return <li>{pokemon.name}</li>;
};
```
:::

The `FragmentOf` type is used as an input type above. This type accepts our fragment document
and creates the fragment mask that a fragment spread would create as well.

We can then use our new `PokemonComponent` in our `PokemonsListComponent` and compose its `PokemonFragment`
into our query:

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [components/PokemonsList.tsx]
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
// @filename: components/Pokemon.tsx
import { graphql, readFragment, FragmentOf } from 'gql.tada';

export const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

interface Props {
// @annotate: The component accepts a fragment mask of PokemonFragment:

  data: FragmentOf<typeof PokemonFragment>;
}

export const PokemonComponent = ({ data }: Props) => {
// @annotate: In the component body we unwrap the fragment mask:

  const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, data);
  return <li>{pokemon.name}</li>;
};

// @filename: components/PokemonsList.tsx
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';
import { useQuery } from 'urql';
import { PokemonFragment, PokemonComponent } from './Pokemon';

const PokemonsListQuery = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList {
    pokemons(limit: 10) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);

export const PokemonsListComponent = () => {
  const [result] = useQuery({ query: PokemonsListQuery });

  return (
    <ul>
      {result.data?.pokemons?.map((pokemon) => (
// @annotate: The masked fragment data is accepted as defined by FragmentOf:

        <PokemonComponent data={pokemon!} key={pokemon?.id} />
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
};
```
:::

Meaning, while we can unmask and use the `PokemonFragment`’s data in the `PokemonComponent`,
the `PokemonsListComponent` cannot access any of the data requirements defined by and meant for the
`PokemonComponent`.

<a href="../guides/fragment-colocation" class="button">
    Learn more about Fragment Colocation
</a>

## Scalars

As we've seen in prior examples, when selection fields, `gql.tada` infers the type
of fields from the given schema automatically. Fields will be nullable if the schema
doesn't mark them as non-nullable. The default scalars will be typed by their
[JSON serialization](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-JSON-Serialization)
value.

| Scalar | Type |
| --| -- |
| `String` | `string` |
| `Boolean` | `boolean` |
| `Int` | `number` |
| `Float` | `number` |

When customizing a scalar, the inferred value type of a field will change according
to the type we pass in the `scalars` mapping type however, as seen in the
["Customizing scalar types" section](./installation#customizing-scalar-types).

:::code-group
```ts twoslash [src/graphql.ts]
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

// ---cut-before---
export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
// @annotate: The ID type now takes on a special type
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
```
:::

Now, creating the `PokemonFragment` with our custom `graphql()` function,
the `id` field changes to the specified `ID` type.

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [components/Pokemon.tsx]
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
// ---cut---
// @filename: components/Pokemon.tsx
// ---cut---
import { graphql, readFragment, FragmentOf } from '../src/graphql';

export const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
  }
`);

interface Props {
  data: FragmentOf<typeof PokemonFragment>;
}

export const PokemonComponent = ({ data }: Props) => {
  const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, data);
  return <li key={pokemon.id}>{pokemon.name}</li>;
};
```
:::

In this case, we've defined all `ID` types to instead use a more specific
type to say that they're stringified numbers, to demonstrate how IDs are
structured in this example API.

### Reusing Scalar Types

Scalar types are often reused in utility functions and it isn't
always possible to [write a fragment](../guides/fragment-colocation)
for all of our utility functions, as some of them may not be
consuming more than a single scalar value.

Following from our last code example, we'd like to now reuse
the `ID` type in a small function that accepts the type and parses
it further.

To do this, we can use the [`graphql.scalar()` helper
function](../reference/gql-tada-api#graphql-scalar) to retrieve
the type of the scalar.

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [utils/parseId.ts]
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/parseId.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';

export type ID = ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'ID'>>;

export const parseId = (id: ID): number => {
  return Number(id);
};
```
:::

In the above example, we've used `ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'ID'>>`
to retrieve the type of our scalar directly from our configuration.

But `graphql.scalar` is also useful when we wish to repeat the type across
the codebase instead. If we want to passively check that the GraphQL
scalar type is compatible to a local type, we can also call `graphql.scalar()`
directly and let TypeScript check for our value to be compatible with
the configured type instead.

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [utils/parseId.ts]
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/parseId.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';

export type ID = `${number}`;

export const parseId = (id: ID): number => {
  const value = graphql.scalar('ID', id);
  return Number(value);
};
```
:::

### Enum Types

When `gql.tada` infers the type of an enum, the output type becomes
a union of all possible literal values.

<div class="column">

```graphql
enum PokemonType {
  Bug
  Dark
  Dragon
  # ...
}
```

```ts
type PokemonType =
  | 'Bug'
  | 'Dark'
  | 'Dragon';
  /* ...*/
```

</div>

And similarly to scalars, we can retrieve the type of enums with the
`graphql.scalar()` helper and reuse them.

```tsx twoslash
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
}>();
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/pokemonType.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';
export type PokemonType = ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'PokemonType'>>;

export const isBugType = (input: 'Bug') => {
  const pokemonType = graphql.scalar('PokemonType', input);
  return input === 'Bug';
};
```

Calling `graphql.scalar()` like in the above example also allows us to check
a hardcoded subset of values against our scalar while implementing other
utility functions.
Since `graphql.scalar()` will enforce the second argument to be typed as
the scalar itself, we can also use it to enforce compatibility of local
types to GraphQL types.

::: info TypeScript Enums
Enum types can only be output as unions of string literals in `gql.tada`, but
if you're migrating from a different code generator you may instead be using
and importing generated TypeScript `enum`s or `const enum`s.

You can still use your own values for enum types and configure them using the
`scalars` option to replace their inferred values. But if you do this, `gql.tada`
won't be able to keep them up-to-date for you.
:::

### Input Objects

Lastly, the most complex types that `graphql.scalar()` can return for us
are `input` types.

```tsx twoslash
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
}>();
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/searchPokemon.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';

export type SearchPokemon = ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'SearchPokemon'>>;
```

Reusing input types is common when we create local state that isn't immediately
used as operation variables, or doesn't match the variables types of some operations.

Commit message:

Update note and intro section

website/get-started/writing-graphql.md, after:

---
title: Writing GraphQL
description: How to get set up and ready
---

# Writing GraphQL

In `gql.tada`, we write our GraphQL documents using the `graphql()`
function and receive the result and variables types inferred from
the document itself.

In this section, we'll see what operation types look like, how
we write fragments, and how to use scalar, enum, and input object
types.

::: info Imports
Some code examples may import `graphql()` from `gql.tada`.
However, if you’ve previously followed the steps on the “Installation” page
[to initialize `gql.tada` manually](./installation#initializing-gqltada-manually),
you’ll instead have to import your custom `graphql()` function, as
returned by `initGraphQLTada()`.
:::

## Queries

When passing a query to `graphql()`, it will be parsed in TypeScript’s type system
and the schema that’s set up is used to map this document over to a type.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonsQuery = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList($limit: Int = 10) {
    pokemons(limit: $limit) {
      id
      name
    }
  }
`);
```

The `PokemonsQuery` variable will have an inferred type that defines the
type of the data result of the query. When adding variables, the types of variables
are added to the inferred type as well.
The resulting type is known as a [`TypedDocumentNode`](https://github.com/dotansimha/graphql-typed-document-node)
and is supported by most GraphQL clients.

When passing a `gql.tada` query to a GraphQL client, the type
of input variables and result data are inferred automatically.
For example, with `urql` and React, this may look like the following:

```tsx twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { useQuery } from 'urql';
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

// @annotate: PokemonsQuery carries a type for data and variables:

const PokemonsQuery = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList($limit: Int = 10) {
    pokemons(limit: $limit) {
      id
      name
    }
  }
`);

const PokemonsListComponent = () => {
// @annotate: Types for data and variables are applied from PokemonsQuery:

  const [result] = useQuery({
    query: PokemonsQuery,
    variables: { limit: 5 },
  });

  return (
    <ul>
      {result.data?.pokemons?.map((pokemon) => (
        <li key={pokemon?.id}>{pokemon?.name}</li>
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
};
```

The same applies to mutation operations, subscription operations, and fragment definitions.

The `graphql()` function will parse your GraphQL definitions, take the first definition it
finds and infers its type automatically.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { graphql, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';

// @annotate: The first definition’s types are inferred:

const MarkCollectedMutation = graphql(`
  mutation MarkCollected($id: ID!) {
    markCollected(id: $id) {
      id
      name
      collected
    }
  }
`);

// @annotate: Inferring the definition’s variables…

type variables = VariablesOf<typeof MarkCollectedMutation>;

// @annotate: …and the definition’s result type.

type result = ResultOf<typeof MarkCollectedMutation>;
```

The above example uses the `ResultOf` and `VariablesOf` types for illustrative purposes.
These type utilities may be used to manually unwrap the types of a GraphQL `DocumentNode`
returned by `graphql()`.

<a href="/guides/typed-documents" class="button">
    Learn more about Typed Documents
</a>

---

## Fragments

The `graphql()` function allows for fragment composition, which means we’re able to create
a fragment and spread it into our definitions or other fragments.

Creating a fragment is the same as any other operation definition.
The type of the first definition, in this case a fragment, will be used
to infer the result type of the returned document:

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);
```

Spreading this fragment into another fragment or operation definition requires us
to pass the fragment into a tuple array on the `graphql()` function’s second argument.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

// ---cut-before---
const PokemonsList = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList {
    pokemons(limit: 10) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);
```

Here we spread our `PokemonFragment` into `PokemonsList` by passing it into
the `graphql()` function and then using its name in the GraphQL document.

### Fragment Masking

However, in `gql.tada` a pattern called **“Fragment Masking”** applies.
`PokemonsList`’s result type does not contain the `name` and `collected` field
from the spread fragment and instead contains a reference to the `PokemonFragment`.

This forces us to unwrap, or rather “unmask”, the fragment first.

```tsx twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
import { useQuery } from 'urql';
import { graphql, readFragment } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

const PokemonsList = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList {
    pokemons(limit: 10) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);

const PokemonsListComponent = () => {
  const [result] = useQuery({ query: PokemonsList });

// @annotate: The data here does not contain our fragment’s fields:

const { pokemons } = result.data!;

  return pokemons?.map((item) => {
// @annotate: Calling readFragment() unwraps the type of the fragment:

    const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, item);
    return pokemon?.name;
  });
};
```

When spreading a fragment into a parent definition, the parent only contains a reference to the fragment.
This means that we’re isolating fragments. Any spread fragment data cannot be accessed directly until
the fragment is unmasked.

```ts twoslash
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
declare var client: import('@urql/core').Client;

// ---cut-before---
import { graphql, readFragment } from 'gql.tada';

const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

const PokemonQuery = graphql(`
  query Pokemon($id: ID!) {
    pokemon(id: $id) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);

const result = await client.query(PokemonQuery, { id: '001' });
// @annotate: Pokemon’s data is only accessible once unmasked with readFragment()
const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, result.data?.pokemon);
```

`PokemonFragment`’s fragment mask in `PokemonQuery` is only unmasked and accessible as its plain result
type once we call `readFragment()` on the fragment mask.
In this case, we’re passing `data.pokemon`, which is an object containing the fragment
mask.

This all only happens and is enforced at a type level, meaning that we don’t incur any overhead
during runtime for masking our fragments.

### Fragment Composition

Fragment Masking is a concept that only exists to enforce proper **Fragment Composition**.

In a componentized app, fragments may be used to define the data requirements of UI components,
which means, we’ll define fragments, colocate them with our components, and compose them into
other fragments or our query.

Since all fragments are masked in our types, this colocation is enforced and we maintain our
data requirements to UI component relationship.

For example, our `PokemonFragment` may be associated with a `Pokemon` component rendering
individual items:

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [components/Pokemon.tsx]
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
// @filename: components/Pokemon.tsx
// ---cut---
import { graphql, readFragment, FragmentOf } from 'gql.tada';

export const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

interface Props {
// @annotate: The component accepts a fragment mask of PokemonFragment:

  data: FragmentOf<typeof PokemonFragment>;
}

export const PokemonComponent = ({ data }: Props) => {
// @annotate: In the component body we unwrap the fragment mask:

  const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, data);
  return <li>{pokemon.name}</li>;
};
```
:::

The `FragmentOf` type is used as an input type above. This type accepts our fragment document
and creates the fragment mask that a fragment spread would create as well.

We can then use our new `PokemonComponent` in our `PokemonsListComponent` and compose its `PokemonFragment`
into our query:

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [components/PokemonsList.tsx]
import './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';
// ---cut-before---
// @filename: components/Pokemon.tsx
import { graphql, readFragment, FragmentOf } from 'gql.tada';

export const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
    collected
  }
`);

interface Props {
// @annotate: The component accepts a fragment mask of PokemonFragment:

  data: FragmentOf<typeof PokemonFragment>;
}

export const PokemonComponent = ({ data }: Props) => {
// @annotate: In the component body we unwrap the fragment mask:

  const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, data);
  return <li>{pokemon.name}</li>;
};

// @filename: components/PokemonsList.tsx
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from 'gql.tada';
import { useQuery } from 'urql';
import { PokemonFragment, PokemonComponent } from './Pokemon';

const PokemonsListQuery = graphql(`
  query PokemonsList {
    pokemons(limit: 10) {
      id
      ...Pokemon
    }
  }
`, [PokemonFragment]);

export const PokemonsListComponent = () => {
  const [result] = useQuery({ query: PokemonsListQuery });

  return (
    <ul>
      {result.data?.pokemons?.map((pokemon) => (
// @annotate: The masked fragment data is accepted as defined by FragmentOf:

        <PokemonComponent data={pokemon!} key={pokemon?.id} />
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
};
```
:::

Meaning, while we can unmask and use the `PokemonFragment`’s data in the `PokemonComponent`,
the `PokemonsListComponent` cannot access any of the data requirements defined by and meant for the
`PokemonComponent`.

<a href="../guides/fragment-colocation" class="button">
    Learn more about Fragment Colocation
</a>

## Scalars

As we've seen in prior examples, when selection fields, `gql.tada` infers the type
of fields from the given schema automatically. Fields will be nullable if the schema
doesn't mark them as non-nullable. The default scalars will be typed by their
[JSON serialization](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-JSON-Serialization)
value.

| Scalar | Type |
| --| -- |
| `String` | `string` |
| `Boolean` | `boolean` |
| `Int` | `number` |
| `Float` | `number` |

When customizing a scalar, the inferred value type of a field will change according
to the type we pass in the `scalars` mapping type however, as seen in the
["Customizing scalar types" section](./installation#customizing-scalar-types).

:::code-group
```ts twoslash [src/graphql.ts]
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from './graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

// ---cut-before---
export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
// @annotate: The ID type now takes on a special type
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
```
:::

Now, creating the `PokemonFragment` with our custom `graphql()` function,
the `id` field changes to the specified `ID` type.

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [components/Pokemon.tsx]
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
// ---cut---
// @filename: components/Pokemon.tsx
// ---cut---
import { graphql, readFragment, FragmentOf } from '../src/graphql';

export const PokemonFragment = graphql(`
  fragment Pokemon on Pokemon {
    id
    name
  }
`);

interface Props {
  data: FragmentOf<typeof PokemonFragment>;
}

export const PokemonComponent = ({ data }: Props) => {
  const pokemon = readFragment(PokemonFragment, data);
  return <li key={pokemon.id}>{pokemon.name}</li>;
};
```
:::

In this case, we've defined all `ID` types to instead use a more specific
type to say that they're stringified numbers, to demonstrate how IDs are
structured in this example API.

### Reusing Scalar Types

Scalar types are often reused in utility functions and it isn't
always possible to [write a fragment](../guides/fragment-colocation)
for all of our utility functions, as some of them may not be
consuming more than a single scalar value.

Following from our last code example, we'd like to now reuse
the `ID` type in a small function that accepts the type and parses
it further.

To do this, we can use the [`graphql.scalar()` helper
function](../reference/gql-tada-api#graphql-scalar) to retrieve
the type of the scalar.

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [utils/parseId.ts]
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/parseId.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';

export type ID = ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'ID'>>;

export const parseId = (id: ID): number => {
  return Number(id);
};
```
:::

In the above example, we've used `ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'ID'>>`
to retrieve the type of our scalar directly from our configuration.

But `graphql.scalar` is also useful when we wish to repeat the type across
the codebase instead. If we want to passively check that the GraphQL
scalar type is compatible to a local type, we can also call `graphql.scalar()`
directly and let TypeScript check for our value to be compatible with
the configured type instead.

::: code-group
```tsx twoslash [utils/parseId.ts]
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
  scalars: {
    ID: `${number}`;
  };
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/parseId.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';

export type ID = `${number}`;

export const parseId = (id: ID): number => {
  const value = graphql.scalar('ID', id);
  return Number(value);
};
```
:::

### Enum Types

When `gql.tada` infers the type of an enum, the output type becomes
a union of all possible literal values.

<div class="column">

```graphql
enum PokemonType {
  Bug
  Dark
  Dragon
  # ...
}
```

```ts
type PokemonType =
  | 'Bug'
  | 'Dark'
  | 'Dragon';
  /* ...*/
```

</div>

And similarly to scalars, we can retrieve the type of enums with the
`graphql.scalar()` helper and reuse them.

```tsx twoslash
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
}>();
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/pokemonType.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';
export type PokemonType = ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'PokemonType'>>;

export const isBugType = (input: 'Bug') => {
  const pokemonType = graphql.scalar('PokemonType', input);
  return input === 'Bug';
};
```

Calling `graphql.scalar()` like in the above example also allows us to check
a hardcoded subset of values against our scalar while implementing other
utility functions.
Since `graphql.scalar()` will enforce the second argument to be typed as
the scalar itself, we can also use it to enforce compatibility of local
types to GraphQL types.

::: info TypeScript Enums
Enum types can only be output as unions of string literals in `gql.tada`, but
if you're migrating from a different code generator you may instead be using
and importing generated TypeScript `enum`s or `const enum`s.

You can still use your own values for enum types and configure them using the
`scalars` option to replace their inferred values. But if you do this, `gql.tada`
won't be able to keep them up-to-date for you.
:::

### Input Objects

Lastly, the most complex types that `graphql.scalar()` can return for us
are `input` types.

```tsx twoslash
// @filename: src/graphql.ts
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from '../graphql/graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
}>();
// ---cut---
// @filename: utils/searchPokemon.ts
// ---cut---
import { graphql } from '../src/graphql';

export type SearchPokemon = ReturnType<typeof graphql.scalar<'SearchPokemon'>>;
```

Reusing input types is common when we create local state that isn't immediately
used as operation variables, or doesn't match the variables types of some operations.
