website/src/content/docs/get-started/installation.mdx, before:

---
title: Installation
description: How to get set up and ready
---

import { Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

The `gql.tada` package provides typings and the runtime API as a library,
while `@0no-co/graphqlsp` integrates with the TypeScript language server
to integrate with an IDE or editor.

On this page, we’ll go through the steps to get everything set up properly.
A quick demo of what this looks like can be found [in an example project in the `gql.tada`
repository.](https://github.com/0no-co/gql.tada/blob/main/examples/example-pokemon-api/)

## Step 1 — Installing packages

We’ll start by installing `gql.tada` as a dependency, and `@0no-co/graphqlsp` as
a dev-dependency using out project’s package manager.

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="npm">

```sh
npm install gql.tada
npm install --save-dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="pnpm">

```sh
pnpm add gql.tada
pnpm add --save-dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="yarn">

```sh
yarn add gql.tada
yarn add --dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="bun">

```sh
bun add gql.tada
bun add --dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Next, we’ll have to add `@0no-co/graphqlsp` as a plugin to our TypeScript
configuration.

```json {4-10} title="tsconfig.json"
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "strict": true,
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./schema.graphql",
        "tadaOutputLocation": "./src/graphql-env.d.ts"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

This will start up a [“TypeScript Language Service Plugin”](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/wiki/Writing-a-Language-Service-Plugin#whats-a-language-service-plugin) which runs when TypeScript is analyzing a file
in our IDE or editor.

`gql.tada` on its own won’t provide you with editor hints, diagnostics, or errors, so `@0no-co/graphqlsp` is crucial
in providing you feedback and help when writing GraphQL documents.

:::note
If you’re using VSCode, you may also want to update your `.vscode/settings.json` file to prompt you
[to use the workspace version of TypeScript](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/typescript/typescript-compiling#_using-the-workspace-version-of-typescript).
Otherwise, the `@0no-co/graphqlsp` plugin won’t work!

```js title=".vscode/settings.json" ins={2-3}
{
  "typescript.tsdk": "node_modules/typescript/lib",
  "typescript.enablePromptUseWorkspaceTsdk": true
}
```
:::

## Step 2 — Configuring a schema

`@0no-co/graphqlsp` needs to have a GraphQL API’s schema to function correctly.
The schema provides it with the types, fields, and description information of a GraphQL API.

We can set `@0no-co/graphqlsp` up with our schema in our `tsconfig.json` file.
In the plugin options we’ll update the `schema` key.

```json {"Configure a schema here:":6-7} title="tsconfig.json"
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",

        "schema": "./schema.graphql",
        "tadaOutputLocation": "./src/graphql-env.d.ts"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The `schema` option currently allows for three different formats to load a schema. It accepts either:
- a path to a `.graphql` file containing a schema definition (in GraphQL SDL format)
- a path to a `.json` file containing a schema’s introspection query data
- a URL to a GraphQL API that can be introspected

<Tabs>
<TabItem label=".graphql file">

```json {6}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./schema.graphql"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label=".json file">

```json {6}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./introspection.json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="URL">

```json {6}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "http://localhost:4321/graphql"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="URL with headers">

```json {6-11}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": {
          "url": "http://localhost:4321/graphql",
          "headers": {
            "Accept": "application/graphql-response+json"
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Step 3 — Configuring typings

Afterwards, `@0no-co/graphqlsp` is ready to also output a typings file for `gql.tada`.
The latter needs a **type** of an introspected GraphQL schema to infer types of
GraphQL documents automatically.

This is configured by providing an output location to `@0no-co/graphqlsp` in our `tsconfig.json` file.
In the plugin options we’ll update the `tadaOutputLocation` key.

```json {"Add typings output location here:":7-8} title="tsconfig.json"
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./schema.graphql",

        "tadaOutputLocation": "./src/graphql-env.d.ts"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The `tadaOutputLocation` path can either be a `.ts` file, a `.d.ts` file, or
a folder, in which case a `introspection.d.ts` file will be created.

Once we start up our editor, `@0no-co/graphqlsp` will run and will create
the output file. In this example, we’ve created a `src/graphql-env.d.ts` file.
When opening this file we should see code that looks like the following:

```ts title="graphql-env.d.ts" collapse={2-11} 
declare const introspection: {
  "__schema": {
    "queryType": {
      "name": "Query"
    },
    "mutationType": null,
    "subscriptionType": null,
    "types": [
      // ...
    ]
  }
};

import * as gqlTada from 'gql.tada';

declare module 'gql.tada' {
  interface setupSchema {
    introspection: typeof introspection
  }
}
```

This file declares our schema’s introspection data in `gql.tada`. After this file
is created by `@0no-co/graphqlsp` automatically, `gql.tada` is set up project-wide
and is **ready to be used.**

### Initializing `gql.tada` manually

Above, we let `@0no-co/graphqlsp` generate a `src/graphql-env.d.ts` file, which sets
`gql.tada` up project-wide for us.

This allows us to import `graphql()` from `gql.tada` directly, but it limits what we
can do, since we can’t customize any scalars, or further configuration
for `gql.tada`. This setup also fails if we have multiple schemas (for example, in a monorepo),
since the declaration in `graphql-env.d.ts` sets a schema up project-wide.

To work around this, we’ll create a file that uses the introspection data manually with the
`initGraphQLTada()` function to create our own `graphql()` function:

```ts title="src/graphql.ts" {4-6}
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from './graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
```

Instead of declaring our schema project-wide, we now have created a `graphql` function
that specifically uses the introspection inside the `graphql-env.d.ts` file that
`@0no-co/graphqlsp` outputs for us.

Instead of importing `graphql` from `gql.tada`, we should now import it from our
custom `src/graphql.ts` file.

### Customizing scalar types

Now that we’ve set up a `src/graphql.ts` file, which uses `initGraphQLTada<>()` to create
a custom `graphql` function, we may also use this function to customize our scalars.

By default, `gql.tada` will have types defined for the [built-in scalars](https://spec.graphql.org/October2021/#sec-Scalars.Built-in-Scalars)
in GraphQL. However, it won’t be able to know the serialized type of your custom scalars.
For instance, our schema may contain a `DateTime` scalar which, when queried, becomes
a string of `new Date().toISOString()`, however, `gql.tada` won’t know that this type
is a string.

```ts {"Define scalar types here:":6-10} title="src/graphql.ts"
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from './graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;

  scalars: {
    DateTime: string,
    JSON: any,
  },
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
```

When using these scalars, they’ll now be mapped to the types in the `scalars` object type.

Commit message:

docs: Add VSCode GraphQL syntax extension note

website/src/content/docs/get-started/installation.mdx, after:

---
title: Installation
description: How to get set up and ready
---

import { Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

The `gql.tada` package provides typings and the runtime API as a library,
while `@0no-co/graphqlsp` integrates with the TypeScript language server
to integrate with an IDE or editor.

On this page, we’ll go through the steps to get everything set up properly.
A quick demo of what this looks like can be found [in an example project in the `gql.tada`
repository.](https://github.com/0no-co/gql.tada/blob/main/examples/example-pokemon-api/)

## Step 1 — Installing packages

We’ll start by installing `gql.tada` as a dependency, and `@0no-co/graphqlsp` as
a dev-dependency using out project’s package manager.

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="npm">

```sh
npm install gql.tada
npm install --save-dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="pnpm">

```sh
pnpm add gql.tada
pnpm add --save-dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="yarn">

```sh
yarn add gql.tada
yarn add --dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="bun">

```sh
bun add gql.tada
bun add --dev @0no-co/graphqlsp
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Next, we’ll have to add `@0no-co/graphqlsp` as a plugin to our TypeScript
configuration.

```json {4-10} title="tsconfig.json"
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "strict": true,
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./schema.graphql",
        "tadaOutputLocation": "./src/graphql-env.d.ts"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

This will start up a [“TypeScript Language Service Plugin”](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/wiki/Writing-a-Language-Service-Plugin#whats-a-language-service-plugin) which runs when TypeScript is analyzing a file
in our IDE or editor.

`gql.tada` on its own won’t provide you with editor hints, diagnostics, or errors, so `@0no-co/graphqlsp` is crucial
in providing you feedback and help when writing GraphQL documents.

:::note
If you’re using VSCode, you may also want to update your `.vscode/settings.json` file to prompt you
[to use the workspace version of TypeScript](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/typescript/typescript-compiling#_using-the-workspace-version-of-typescript).
Otherwise, the `@0no-co/graphqlsp` plugin won’t work!

```js title=".vscode/settings.json" ins={2-3}
{
  "typescript.tsdk": "node_modules/typescript/lib",
  "typescript.enablePromptUseWorkspaceTsdk": true
}
```

To enable syntax highlighting for GraphQL, you can install the official
[“GraphQL: Syntax Highlighting” VSCode extension.](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=GraphQL.vscode-graphql-syntax)
:::

## Step 2 — Configuring a schema

`@0no-co/graphqlsp` needs to have a GraphQL API’s schema to function correctly.
The schema provides it with the types, fields, and description information of a GraphQL API.

We can set `@0no-co/graphqlsp` up with our schema in our `tsconfig.json` file.
In the plugin options we’ll update the `schema` key.

```json {"Configure a schema here:":6-7} title="tsconfig.json"
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",

        "schema": "./schema.graphql",
        "tadaOutputLocation": "./src/graphql-env.d.ts"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The `schema` option currently allows for three different formats to load a schema. It accepts either:
- a path to a `.graphql` file containing a schema definition (in GraphQL SDL format)
- a path to a `.json` file containing a schema’s introspection query data
- a URL to a GraphQL API that can be introspected

<Tabs>
<TabItem label=".graphql file">

```json {6}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./schema.graphql"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label=".json file">

```json {6}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./introspection.json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="URL">

```json {6}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "http://localhost:4321/graphql"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="URL with headers">

```json {6-11}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": {
          "url": "http://localhost:4321/graphql",
          "headers": {
            "Accept": "application/graphql-response+json"
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Step 3 — Configuring typings

Afterwards, `@0no-co/graphqlsp` is ready to also output a typings file for `gql.tada`.
The latter needs a **type** of an introspected GraphQL schema to infer types of
GraphQL documents automatically.

This is configured by providing an output location to `@0no-co/graphqlsp` in our `tsconfig.json` file.
In the plugin options we’ll update the `tadaOutputLocation` key.

```json {"Add typings output location here:":7-8} title="tsconfig.json"
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "plugins": [
      {
        "name": "@0no-co/graphqlsp",
        "schema": "./schema.graphql",

        "tadaOutputLocation": "./src/graphql-env.d.ts"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The `tadaOutputLocation` path can either be a `.ts` file, a `.d.ts` file, or
a folder, in which case a `introspection.d.ts` file will be created.

Once we start up our editor, `@0no-co/graphqlsp` will run and will create
the output file. In this example, we’ve created a `src/graphql-env.d.ts` file.
When opening this file we should see code that looks like the following:

```ts title="graphql-env.d.ts" collapse={2-11} 
declare const introspection: {
  "__schema": {
    "queryType": {
      "name": "Query"
    },
    "mutationType": null,
    "subscriptionType": null,
    "types": [
      // ...
    ]
  }
};

import * as gqlTada from 'gql.tada';

declare module 'gql.tada' {
  interface setupSchema {
    introspection: typeof introspection
  }
}
```

This file declares our schema’s introspection data in `gql.tada`. After this file
is created by `@0no-co/graphqlsp` automatically, `gql.tada` is set up project-wide
and is **ready to be used.**

### Initializing `gql.tada` manually

Above, we let `@0no-co/graphqlsp` generate a `src/graphql-env.d.ts` file, which sets
`gql.tada` up project-wide for us.

This allows us to import `graphql()` from `gql.tada` directly, but it limits what we
can do, since we can’t customize any scalars, or further configuration
for `gql.tada`. This setup also fails if we have multiple schemas (for example, in a monorepo),
since the declaration in `graphql-env.d.ts` sets a schema up project-wide.

To work around this, we’ll create a file that uses the introspection data manually with the
`initGraphQLTada()` function to create our own `graphql()` function:

```ts title="src/graphql.ts" {4-6}
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from './graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
```

Instead of declaring our schema project-wide, we now have created a `graphql` function
that specifically uses the introspection inside the `graphql-env.d.ts` file that
`@0no-co/graphqlsp` outputs for us.

Instead of importing `graphql` from `gql.tada`, we should now import it from our
custom `src/graphql.ts` file.

### Customizing scalar types

Now that we’ve set up a `src/graphql.ts` file, which uses `initGraphQLTada<>()` to create
a custom `graphql` function, we may also use this function to customize our scalars.

By default, `gql.tada` will have types defined for the [built-in scalars](https://spec.graphql.org/October2021/#sec-Scalars.Built-in-Scalars)
in GraphQL. However, it won’t be able to know the serialized type of your custom scalars.
For instance, our schema may contain a `DateTime` scalar which, when queried, becomes
a string of `new Date().toISOString()`, however, `gql.tada` won’t know that this type
is a string.

```ts {"Define scalar types here:":6-10} title="src/graphql.ts"
import { initGraphQLTada } from 'gql.tada';
import type { introspection } from './graphql-env.d.ts';

export const graphql = initGraphQLTada<{
  introspection: introspection;

  scalars: {
    DateTime: string,
    JSON: any,
  },
}>();

export type { FragmentOf, ResultOf, VariablesOf } from 'gql.tada';
export { readFragment } from 'gql.tada';
```

When using these scalars, they’ll now be mapped to the types in the `scalars` object type.
